2020
2019          International Optimist Dinghy Association
              www.optiworld.org




       International Optimist
                 Class Rules




          i
ii
CONTENTS

1.    GENERAL                                                              1

2.    ADMINISTRATION                                                       1
2.1   English Language                                                     1
2.2   Builders                                                             1
2.3   World Sailing Class Fee                                              2
2.4   Registration and Measurement Certificate                             2
2.5   Measurement                                                          4
2.6   Measurement Instructions                                             4
2.7   Identification Marks                                                 5
2.8   Advertising                                                          6
3.    CONSTRUCTION AND MEASUREMENT RULES                                   6

3.1   General                                                              6
3.2   Hull                                                                 7
      3.2.1     Materials - GRP                                             7
      3.2.2     Hull Measurement Rules (see also CR 3.1)                    7
      3.2.3     GRP Hull Construction Details                              11
      3.2.4     Construction Details - Wood & Wood Epoxy: See Appendix A   14
      3.2.5     Rule number not used.                                      14
      3.2.6     Fittings                                                   14
      3.2.7     Bouyancy                                                   16
      3.2.8     Weight                                                     17

3.3   Daggerboard                                                          17
3.4   Rudder and Tiller                                                    20
3.5   Spars                                                                22
      3.5.1     Materials                                                  22
      3.5.2     Mast                                                       23
      3.5.3     Boom                                                       24
      3.5.4     Sprit                                                      25
      3.5.5     Running Rigging                                            26




                                                iii
4.   ADDITIONAL RULES                                                               26

5.   SPARE RULE NUMBER                                                              27

6.   SAIL                                                                           27
     6.1     General                                                                 27
     6.2     Sailmaker                                                               28
     6.3     Mainsail                                                                28
     6.4     Dimensions                                                              30
     6.5     Class Insignia, National Letters and Sail Numbers, Luff Measurement Band 31
     6.6     Additional Rules                                                        32



APPENDIX A                                                                          33

PLANS                                                                               36

ADDENDUM                                                                            37




                                         iv
1.      GENERAL
1.1     The object of the class is to provide racing for young people at low cost.
1.2     The Optimist is a One-Design Class Dinghy. Except where these rules
        specifically permit variations, boats of this class shall be alike in hull form,
        construction, weight and weight distribution, rigging spars and sail plan.
        Note: In deciding whether an item is permitted it should be noted that, in a
               One-Design Class, unless the rules specifically state that something
               is permitted it shall be assumed to be prohibited.
1.3     These rules are complementary to the plans, measurement forms and
        measurement diagrams. Any request for interpretation and resolution there
        of shall be made in accordance with current World Sailing regulations.
1.4     In the event of discrepancy between these rules, the measurement form
        and/or the plans the matter shall be referred to World Sailing.
2.      ADMINISTRATION
2.1     English Language
2.1.1   The official language of the class is English, and in the event of a dispute
        over interpretation the English text shall prevail.
2.1.2   The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
2.1.3   Wherever in these rules the words “Class Rules” are used they shall be
        taken as including the plans, diagrams and the measurement forms.
2.1.4   The “National Class Association” is the International Optimist Class
        Association in the country concerned.
2.2     Builders
2.2.1   The Optimist may be built by any professional or amateur builder.
2.2.2   Professional builders shall be responsible for supplying boats complying
        with the Class
        Rules. The builder shall at his own expense correct or replace any boat
               which fails to pass measurement, due to an omission or error by the
               builder, provided that the boat is submitted for measurement within
               twelve months of purchase.
2.2.3   Manufacturers of kits or parts shall be responsible for supplying
        parts, which, when assembled in accordance with the manufacturer’s
        instructions (if any), will produce boats complying with the Class Rules. The
        manufacturer of the kit or parts which is shown not to do this shall, at his
        own expense, replace the parts of the kit which are incorrect provided that
        the error is made known to the manufacturer not more than twelve months
        from the date of purchase.




                                          1
2.2.4   A builder shall issue with each hull a written builder’s declaration, stating
        that the hull complies with the relevant Class Rules.
2.3     World Sailing Class Fee
2.3.1   The amount of the World Sailing Class Fee is determined by World Sailing
        in consultation with IODA. The Executive Committee may alter this amount
        following such consultation.
2.3.2   The World Sailing Class Fee shall be paid by the builder on each hull as
        soon as building or moulding commences. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls
        the plaque shall be supplied at the time of measurement.
2.3.3   The builder shall buy the building plaque and Registration Book:
        (a) for GRP hulls, from IODA
        (b) for wood and wood/epoxy hulls, from IODA or the National Optimist
        Association
2.3.4   (a) IODA is responsible for collecting the World Sailing Class Fee on behalf
        of World Sailing.
        (b) IODA will buy building plaques from World Sailing unless otherwise
        agreed with World Sailing.
        (c) IODA or the National Association shall sell the plaques to the builder.
        Each plaque shall, at every stage, be sold with the official World Sailing
        Class Fee receipt and the builders declaration form. The World Sailing Class
        Fee receipt shall be sent to the appropriate National Authority when the
        boat’s sail number is applied for.
2.3.5   For each World Sailing Class Fee paid, IODA or the National Optimist
        Association shall issue a builder’s declaration, World Sailing Class Fee
        receipt and a World Sailing Plaque, which the builder shall deliver with
        the hull to the owner. Builder’s declarations and World Sailing Class Fee
        receipts are only valid if they are made out on the official forms issued by
        IODA. The building fee receipt and builder’s declaration is incorporated in
        the Registration Book.
2.4     Registration and Measurement Certificate
2.4.1   No boat is permitted to race in the class unless it has a valid measurement
        certificate. This rule may be suspended in the case of charter boats at any
        event with the permission of the IODA Executive Committee.
2.4.2   Each National Authority shall issue sail numbers which shall be consecutive
        and the number shall be preceded by the national letters. Numbering may
        restart at 1 on reaching number 9999. A National Authority shall issue a sail
        number only on receipt of evidence that the building fee has been paid.




                                         2
2.4.3   The certificate is obtained as follows:
        (a) The builder shall have the hull measured by a measurer officially
            recognised by his National Authority. The Registration Book with
            the World Sailing Class Fee receipt, builder’s declaration and hull
            measurement form section completed shall be supplied to the owner
            of the boat.
        (b) The owner shall apply to the appropriate National Authority for a sail
            number enclosing their Registration Book with builder’s declaration and
            building fee receipt. The National Authority shall enter the sail number
            in the Registration Book.
        (c) The owner is responsible for sending the Registration Book with the
            builder’s declaration and all measurement form sections completed to
            his National Authority, together with any registration fee that may be
            required. On receipt of this the National Authority shall complete the
            measurement certificate section of the Registration Book and return
            it to the owner. Note that where a National Authority prefers to issue
            its own certificate this shall be firmly fixed to, and mentioned in the
            Registration Book.
2.4.4   Change of ownership invalidates the measurement certificate but shall not
        necessitate remeasurement. The new owner shall apply to his National
        Authority for endorsement of the certificate/Registration Book returning it
        with any re-registration fee required and stating the necessary particulars.
        The measurement certificate/Registration Book shall then be returned to
        the owner.
2.4.5   If a replacement Registration book is required, it may be obtained from
        IODA. The new Registration book shall be printed with the same plaque
        number as the old Registration book. In the case of hulls produced before
        Registration Books were introduced, where the Measurement Certificate
        has been lost a National Authority may, after consultation with IODA, issue
        a replacement Measurement Certificate, valid for all events other than IODA
        championships, without evidence of measurement provided that theWorld
        Sailing/ISAF/IYRU/ plaque remains affixed to the hull. (Note that such
        plaques have numbers lower than 92000).
2.4.6   Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules,World Sailing or the
        National Authority shall have the power to refuse to grant a certificate, or
        withdraw a measurement certificate from any boat, giving written reasons
        for taking such action.
2.4.7   In countries where there is no National Authority or in which the National
        Authority does not wish to administer the class, its functions as stated in
        these rules shall be carried out by IODA or its delegated representatives (i.e.
        National Class Associations).




                                         3
2.5     Measurement
2.5.1   Only a measurer officially recognised by a National Authority shall
        measure a hull, spars, sails and equipment, and sign the declaration
        on the measurement form that they comply with the Class Rules. Hulls
        shall be measured in accordance with the appropriate hull measurement
        instructions. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls see Appendix A.
2.5.2   The measurer shall report on the measurement form anything which he
        considers to be a departure from the intended nature or design of the boat
        or to be against the general interest of the class. A measurement certificate
        may be refused, even if the specific requirements of the rules are satisfied.
2.5.3   A measurer shall not measure a hull, spars, sails, or equipment owned
        or built by himself, or in which he is an interested party or has a vested
        interest.
2.5.4   For wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see Appendix A
        All GRP hulls shall comply with the current rules or the rules current at the
        time the boat was first measured and registered with the National Authority
        as the bona fide property of a current Optimist sailor or his family, or a
        sailing club/school recognised by the national authority or national Optimist
        association.
        GRP hulls first so measured and registered between 1 March 1995 and 1
        March 1996 shall conform either to the class rules in force from 1 March
        1994 or to the class rules in force from 1 March 1995. Hulls first so
        measured and registered after 1 March 1996 shall conform to the class
        rules then current.
        Fittings, spars, sails and other equipment shall comply with the current
        rules, unless otherwise stated in the specific class rule referring to such
        equipment.
2.5.5   It is the owner’s responsibility to ensure that his hull, spars, sails and
        equipment are maintained in accordance with the Class Rules so that the
        measurement certificate is not invalidated. Alterations or replacements to
        the hull, sails, spars and equipment shall comply with the current rules.
2.5.6   New or altered sails shall be measured by a measurer who shall stamp or
        sign and date the sails near the tack. The details shall be recorded on the
        certificate and the entry signed by the measurer or the secretary of the
        National Authority.
2.6     Measurement Instructions
        Except where varies by these rules the World Sailing Measurement
        Instructions shall apply.




                                         4
2.7       Identification Marks
2.7.1     The Class Emblem shall be the letter I and O and shall conform in shape
          and size to the pattern held by World Sailing. Copies may be obtained from
          the National Class Associations, IODA or National Authority.




2.7.2     The building fee plaque shall be legible, clearly shown and permanently
          glued on the starboard side of the aft face of the mast thwart bulkhead.
2.7.3     All hulls, may have the sail number and National Letters clearly identified on
          the starboard side of the aft face of the mast thwart bulkhead in figures not
          less than 10 mm high.
2.7.3.1   GRP hulls may have an identification number, in figures not less than 10 mm
          high, moulded in each hull component:
          Component 1: Hull shell: the forward face of the forward transom (within 60
          mm of the centre of this transom).
          Component 2: Gunwale - Mast Thwart assembly: the starboard bottom
          flange of the mast thwart bulkhead.
          Component 3: Daggerboard Case - Midship Frame assembly: the forward
          bottom flange of the daggerboard case.
          This identification number shall consist of : code number of builder and
          code number of mould, both allocated by IODA to each mould and builder
          following approval of each prototype.
          This number may be invalidated if it is established that hulls have deviated
          from Class Rules after prototype measurement.
          Example of a possible hull identification no.: ( this example no. is not valid)




                                           5
2.7.3.2   On GRP hulls the builder shall engrave on the forward transom, 15 mm
          below the identification number a registration mark, in figures not less than
          6 mm high. This registration mark shall consist of:



2.7.3.3   Manufacturers shall allot a serial number to the mast, boom, sprit,
          daggerboard and rudder. These serial numbers shall be reported on the
          appropriate Measurement Form by the measurer and shall be clearly and
          indelibly marked by the builder on the rudder, daggerboard and spars.
2.7.4     The sail number and National Letters shall be clearly marked on the rudder,
          daggerboard and spars.
2.7.5     The sail shall carry identification marks indicated in rule 6.5 and each sail
          manufactured or measured after January 1st 1990 shall have permanently
          fixed near its tack an officially numbered sail button or sail label. No sail
          shall be accepted for first measurement without a sail button or sail label.
          Buttons or labels shall not be transferred from one sail to another. Sail
          labels shall be permanently glued to the sail with two lines of stitching
          across the label. Alternatively, labels shall be permanently glued to the
          sail and further secured with the ICA supplied rivet. Buttons / Labels shall
          normally be obtained from the International Optimist Dinghy Association
          (IODA) by the sailmakers but may also be obtained, if necessary, by
          National Class Associations.
2.7.6     All emblems, plaques, marks and numbers shall be clearly legible, of
          durable material and shall be securely attached.
2.8       Advertising
2.8.1     Competitor advertising is only permitted as follows: the hull in any area
          not already designated for Event Advertising. Such advertising may only be
          applied as a temporary adhesive sticker.
2.8.2     In addition to World Sailing Regulation 20.2.4, promotion of tobacco or
          alcohol products or advertising of an overtly sexual nature, is not permitted.
3.        CONSTRUCTION AND MEASUREMENT RULES
3.1       General
3.1.1     All boats shall be built according to the Class Rules (see also CR 2.1.3). The
          dimensions and shape of the hull shall be as shown on the plans and as
          given in these rules, diagrams and measurement forms and shall conform
          with the tolerances stated therein. Materials shall be as specified in these
          Class Rules except that titanium, carbon fibre or other exotic materials are
          prohibited.
3.1.2     Any attempt to concentrate the weight of the hull is prohibited.




                                          6
3.2       Hull
3.2.1     Materials - GRP.
          For CR 3.2.1 for wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see Appendix A.
3.2.1.1   The hull shall be constructed of materials approved by World Sailing The
          following are the currently approved materials: Glass Reinforced Plastic
          (GRP).
3.2.1.2   Hulls shall be constructed from:




          Mats & woven cloth are specified in grams per square metre +/- 10% (gr./
          m2)
          The E glass fibres and Polyester resin shall be transparent. Coloured fibres
          and resins are prohibited.
          Foam core is specified in thickness and weight per cubic metre +/- 10%
          (mm; kg/m3)
          No material other than those prescribed above shall be used to build hulls.
          In case of doubt the IODA and World Sailing may prescribe any tests and
          investigations at builder’s expense. (see also CR 3.2.3.2)
3.2.2     Hull Measurement Rules (see also CR 3.1)
          For GRP hulls, World Sailing or IODA will require samples of the hull
          laminates to check compliance with the Class Rules. A builder shall permit
          an approved measurer or class representative to inspect work at any time
          during production of hulls.
3.2.2.1   GRP Hulls. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see Appendix A.
          Unless otherwise prescribed in these Class Rules, plans and measurement
          forms, tolerances shall be +/- 2 mm. Measurements prescribed as max.
          (=not more than) or min. (=not less than) shall have no further tolerances.
          Some tolerance examples (all measurements in mm):
          XYZ co-ordinate: 1037/008/35.3 i.e. all standard tolerances +/-2. (1035-
          1039/006-010/33.3-37.3)
          Dimension: 40. i.e. standard tolerance +/-2. (38-42)



                                          7
          XYZ co-ordinate: 2158 +/- 4/000/172 i.e. X co-ordinate 2158 +/- 4 (2154-
          2162), Y co-ordinate 000 and Z co-ordinate 172 have standard tolerance
          +/- 2.
          XYZ co-ordinate (1037/008/35.3) +/- 4 i.e. all co-ordinates +/- 4
          Dimension: 40 +/- 3 i.e. 37-43.
          Dimension: 40 +4/-0 i.e. 40-44.
          The tolerances on hull measurements are intended to allow for genuine
          building errors and for subsequent distortion only and shall not be used to
          deliberately alter the design shape.
3.2.2.2   GRP Hull Prototype Measurement: It is obligatory for all builders of
          GRP hulls to ensure that any prototype hull measures correctly before
          series production commences. Non-professional builders shall ensure
          that the first hull built in any mould shall be measured as a prototype.
          Only measurers approved by World Sailing and the IODA shall measure
          prototypes. (see also CR 2.7.3.1)
3.2.2.3   The Base-line shall be a horizontal line passing through points which are
          110 mm and 162 mm below the outer surface of the hull on its centreline
          at 28 mm and 2121 mm respectively from a vertical plane through the
          lower corner of the aft transom. The upperbase- line shall be a horizontal
          centreline passing through points which are 63 mm above the highest
          point of the aft transom and 23 mm above the highest point of the forward
          transom.
3.2.2.4   The aft transom shall be at right angles to the base line but a maximum
          deviation of 5 mm, measured at the upper edge of the transom is permitted.




3.2.2.5   GRP Hulls. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls see Appendix A.
          The overall length excluding rudder fittings shall be 2300 mm +/- 7
          mm, measured at point 4. For length and beam measurements points 4
          (sheerline) shall be defined by using the ‘Standardized Sheerline Finder’.
3.2.2.6   A straight edge long enough to span the bottom panel from chine to chine
          placed at any point on the panel at right angles to the fore and aft centreline
          shall nowhere be more than 5 mm from the surface of the panel. No
          hollows are allowed.

                                            8
3.2.2.7   A straight edge placed anywhere in contact with the side panel and
          spanning the panel and so angled that it lies as close as possible to the
          panel shall nowhere be more than 5mm from the surface of the panel.
3.2.2.8   A straight edge 300 mm long placed anywhere on the bottom panel parallel
          to the fore and aft centreline of the boat shall nowhere be more than 4 mm
          from the surface of the bottom panel. No hollows are allowed. A straight
          edge 150 mm long, placed in the same way, shall nowhere be more than 2
          mm from the bottom panel.




          On GRP hulls only, for the purpose of this and other ‘panel flatness
          measurements’ the extent of the panels will be limited by an edge zone,
          defined by the ‘Standardized Edge-Edge-Zone Finder’.




                                          9
3.2.2.9    GRP Hulls. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see Appendix A.
           The forward and aft transoms, mast thwart bulkhead, midship frame aft
           face and daggerboard case (vertical) sides shall be flat with not more than
           5 mm tolerance. The top sides of the mast thwart, daggerboard case and
           midship frame shall be flat +2-0 mm (i.e no hollows allowed).
3.2.2.10   GRP Hulls. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see Appendix A.
           The inside length of the daggerboard slot and of the slot in the bottom
           panel shall be 330 mm +/-4 mm. The vertical ends in the daggerboard slot
           shall be square to the base line. At each end a rake to taper not exceeding
           4 mm is permitted. The daggerboard case top side, measured at the top
           edges of the ends of the daggerboard slot, shall be parallel to the upper
           base line, within a tolerance of 5 mm maximum.
3.2.2.11   GRP Hulls. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see Appendix A.
           The inside width of the daggerboard case slot shall be 17 mm +/- 1 mm.
           The fore and aft ends of the slot shall be semi-circular in cross section.
           (See also CR 3.2.6.1)
3.2.2.12   GRP Hulls. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see Appendix A.
           The outside edges of the hull between the bottom and side panels, between
           the bottom and forward transom, and between the side panels and forward
           transom shall be rounded to a radius of 10 mm +0/-1 mm. At the aft
           transom side and bottom outside edges no radius is permitted.
3.2.2.13   The mast hole in the thwart shall be approximately circular. The diameter
           is optional but shall not vary by more than 3mm in any direction. A sleeve
           of any material may be fitted in the hole to limit abrasion. The sleeve
           shall not extend more than 3 mm above the mast thwart. The total height
           of the sleeve shall not exceed 30 mm and its hole shall comply with the
           requirements of this rule.




3.2.2.14   Except as specified in these Class Rules or plans, holes or cut outs in the
           gunwale, daggerboard case, midship frame, mast thwart and bulkhead are
           prohibited. (see also CR 1.2)




                                           10
3.2.2.15   GRP Hulls.
           To avoid sharp projections and injuries, the exposed edges of: the gunwale
           and rubbing strake, midship frame top flange, daggerboard case opening,
           mast thwart and mast thwart bulkhead opening; shall be rounded to the
           maximum possible radius.




3.2.2.16   GRP Hulls. For wood and wood/epoxy hulls, see plans
           The Gunwale-Rubbing strake section is defined perpendicular* to the
           sheerline. its positioning angle is fixed and related to the base line reference
           surface only. The Gunwale section shall be constant throughout its entire
           length, including the Forward and Aft transom, except within 180 mm of
           the intersection between Transom and Side sheerlines. The Rubbing strake
           section shall be constant throughout its entire length, including the Forward
           and Aft transom, except within 10 mm of the intersection between Transom
           and Side sheerlines. (*If sheerline is curved, perpendicular = along the
           radius of the sheerline curve)
3.2.3      GRP Hull Construction Details
           See also CR 3.2.2
           For wood and wood/epoxy hull construction details, see Appendix A
3.2.3.1    GRP Moulds.
           Hulls shall be constructed of only three moulded components as described
           in CR 2.7.3.1. Each of these three components shall be constructed using
           only one mould. Builders shall apply for a mould identification number
           allocated by the IODA for each mould. (see also CR 2.7.3.1 & 2.7.3.2)
3.2.3.2    Laminate specifications. (see also CR 3.2.1.2)
           •   Laminate specification and lay up order shall be as defined in these
               Class Rules, details and plans.
           •   Distribution of glass content and weight of each laminate shall be
               uniform throughout within +/- 5%.
           •   Thickness of laminateshall be uniformthroughoutwithin +/- 5% or1 mm
               whichever is greater.
           •   Thickness and density of foam core in the bottom and the mast thwart
               laminate shall be uniform throughout within +/- 3%.


                                           11
•   For the purpose of building efficiency, overlapping of 1 mat, woven cloth
    or biaxial is permitted within 50 mm. from any corner. Overlapping, if
    any, shall be applied over the full length along each corner.
•   Any laminate shall only have one mould side, which shall be smooth.
•   Moulded patterns are not permitted except for an optional anti-slip
    pattern not exceeding 1mm thickness at the gunwale aft of the midship
    frame.
•   The upper 300 mat of the bottom laminate shall
    overlap the 300 mat used in the mast step base to
    ensure a strong bond between hull and mast step.




                                12
For the purpose of positioning and fixing, the top of the daggerboard case,
the flanges of the midship frame-daggerboard case assembly and the
flanges of the mast thwart bulkhead shall consist of min 3 x 450 / max 5 x
450 mat (min 3 mm / max 8 mm thickness). At this top and these flanges,
the distribution of glass content and the thickness of the laminate need not
be uniform throughout.




                               13
3.2.4     Construction Details - Wood & Wood Epoxy: See Appendix A
3.2.5     Rule number not used.
3.2.6     Fittings
3.2.6.1   The following fittings are permitted:
          (a) 2 Mainsheet blocks (excluding those on the boom; each with a
              maximum of 2 sheaves) shall be attached to the hull inner bottom. The
              centre of their fixing points shall be at 786 mm +/- 5mm and 894 mm
              +/- 5mm from the forward face of the aft transom
          (b) One ratchet block for the mainsheet.
          (c) 2 toe straps and 4 associated fixing plates of 50 mm +/- 10mm x 20
              mm +/- 5mm x 2mm +/- 1mm if metal or 50 mm +/- 10mm x 20mm +/-
              5 mm x 7 mm +/- 3 mm if plastic. (see also CR 3.2.6.2 adn CR 3.2.7.3)
              Up to three pieces of cord or elastic cord may be used to lift the toe-
              straps off the hull shell floor.
          (d) A compass and associated fittings, which shall all be removable
              for weighing the hull. A compass may include a timing device. An
              electronic timing device is permitted. No electronic devices other than
              those required or permitted by an Organizing Authority and/ or IODA
              in the Notice of Race and/or Sailing Instructions, shall be permitted on
              board when racing.
          (e) Retaining clip(s) for a paddle.
          (f) An adjustable mast step. Movement of the mast at the mast step or at
              the passage of the mast through the mast thwart shall not be able to
              exceed 3 mm in any horizontal direction. The mast or mast step shall
              not be adjusted while racing. Mast step devices which can be easily set
              while racing in such a way that this rule is infringed, are prohibited.
          (g) Retaining clips for water bottles, food container or other personal
              equipment, which shall be removable for weighing hte hull.
          (h) Retaining clip for fastening the tiller extension to the tiller.
          (i)   Strips of non-metallic material may be fitted to the daggerboard case
                slot within 30 mm of the top and bottom of the daggerboard case
                slot to achieve a uniform opening of 16 mm +/- 2 mm at the top and
                bottom of the daggerboard case slot. Additional nonmetallic material
                may be placed within 30 mm in any direction of each end of the
                top and bottom of the daggerboard case slot to act as positioning
                and protection of the daggerboard. This additional material shall be
                removed upon request of the measurer, for them measurement of the
                daggerboard case slot.(See also CR 3.2.2.11).
          (j)   A handle or ball may be used on the outer end of:
                (i)   Sprint halyard.
                (ii) Boom downhaul.

                                           14
          (k) 1 hole (diameter max 8 mm) on the centre line in the top of the forward
              gunwale just after the forward transom, for drainage; 1 hole (diameter
              max 8 mm) on the centre line in the top of the aft gunwale just before
              the aft transom, for drainage and or for fixing of an optional shock-
              cord to tension the toe straps. (see also 4.3); 1 hole (diameter max
              8 mm) on the centre line in the daggerboard case top side, aft of the
              daggerboard slot, for drainage.
          (l)   One or two eyes may be attached to the daggerboard case (see CR
                3.3.5).
3.2.6.2   Backing plates, when used in GRP boats, shall comply with the Plans and
          laid-in as shown on this diagram (i.e. top surface of backing plate flush with
          top of bottom foam core).




3.2.6.3   Toe straps can be attached to the midship frame, using at most 4 fixing
          plates (two for each strap) of 50 mm +/-10 mm x 20 mm +/-5 mm x 2 mm
          +/-1mm for metal plates or 50mm +/-10 mm x 20 mm +/-5 mm x 7 mm +/-3
          mm for plastic plates.
3.2.6.4   Fittings, including backing plates, shall conform to the dimensions of the
          laid-in backing plates and be securely attached to them as shown. This rule
          shall be effective from 01.10.2016 except that boats fitted and measured
          with mast step devices not complying with this rule by this date will remain
          Class legal.
3.2.6.5   The following items, and others not specifically permitted by these rules,
          are prohibited:
          (a) Mainsheet cleats, mainsheet horse, track or traveller.
          (b) Suction bailers and bilge pumps.
          (c) Decking or spray covers of any sort.
          (d) Any apparatus or contrivance outboard, or extending outboard, which
              is, or may be used to assist In supporting the helmsman outboard.
          (e) Any fittings constructed in part or whole of titanium.




                                          15
3.2.6.6   Fixing Plates for Rudder Fittings on hull.
          Each Rudder Gudgeon can be fixed on the aft transom with one fixing plate
          positioned inside the aft transom. Each fixing plate, if present, shall be in
          metal, except titanium, with maximum dimensions of 60 mm x 25 mm x 3
          mm. If the fixing plate is not used a washer for each bolt can be used.




3.2.7     Bouyancy
3.2.7.1   The hull shall be fitted with three buoyancy units in the form of inflated
          air bags made of strong fibre-reinforced material. Each unit shall be 45
          litres +/- 5 litres. Each unit shall be equipped with a fill valve that positively
          prevents the accidental release of air (i.e.- Nonreturn valves and threaded
          valves with screw-on caps). The minimum weight of each unit shall be 200
          grams.
3.2.7.2   One unit shall be placed along the whole width of the aft transom and one
          unit shall be placed along each side between the midship frame and the
          mast thwart bulkhead.
3.2.7.3   Buoyancy units shall be securely fastened to the hull by three straps. Each
          strap shall be 45 mm +/- 6mm wide and shall be regularly checked. 1
          backing plate in GRP boats of metal 50 +/- 10 mm x 20 +/- 5 mm x 2 +/- 1
          mm and 1 fixing plate, 50 +/- 10 mm x 20 +/- 5 mm x 2 +/- 1 mm if metal or
          50 +/- 10 mm x 20 +/- 5 mm x 7 mm +/- 3 mm if plastic, shall be used for
          fastening of each strap. At the aft transom centre strap a bigger plate 50
          +/- 10 mm x 50 +/- 10 mm x 2 +/-1 mm if metal or 50 +/- 10 mm x 50 +/- 10
          mm x 7 mm +/- 3 mm if plastic for combined use with the toe-strap shall be
          used Alternatively an eye may be used for attachment of the aft end of the
          toe straps at the centre buoyancy bag attachment point.”
3.2.7.4   The owner is responsible at all times for the buoyancy and for ensuring
          that at intervals of not more than 12 months the buoyancy is tested and
          the measurement certificate endorsed by a measurer or a responsible club
          officer. The measurement certificate shall not be valid until so endorsed.
3.2.7.5   The measurer shall witness a buoyancy test as follows:
          The boat shall be swamped with water and with iron weights of not less
          than 60 kg placed aft of and within 100 mm of the midship frame, it shall
          float with the gunwales clear of the water. The measurer shall make sure
          that the buoyancy and its fastening are sound, and that inflatable buoyancy
          shows no visible signs of deflation, deterioration or damage.

                                            16
          As an alternative the measurer shall have the buoyancy bags removed from
          the hull, fully inflated, and then check for deflation, deterioration or damage.
          The measurer shall then check each strap for deterioration, damage or
          fraying and then check each strap individually by lifting the side of the boat
          (or the transom in the case of the aft straps) off the ground. Finally, the
          bags should be replaced in the boat, re-inflated and the straps checked to
          ensure that the bag is held securely in place.
3.2.7.6   The first buoyancy test shall normally be completed at the time of the
          first measurement of the boat. However, if the measurer certifies that the
          buoyancy test could not be taken at that time, but in all other respects the
          Class Rules are satisfied the measurement certificate may be issued but
          with the endorsement “Not valid until a buoyancy test has been passed.”
3.2.8     Weight
3.2.8.1   The weight of the hull in dry condition, including: rudder gudgeons fixed to
          the aft transom, buoyancy straps, toe straps and associated fixings (without
          removable foam or protection), mast step, block fittings permanently
          attached, but excluding: corrector weights, blocks, mainsheet, buoyancy
          air bags, painter, bailer, paddle, compass (with bracket if any) and fixings,
          retaining clips for water bottles, food containers or other personal
          equipment and fixings, and all other not specifically permitted items, shall
          not be less than 32 kg.
3.2.8.2   If the weight of the hull in the same condition as prescribed in CR 3.2.8.1
          but including buoyancy air bags is less than 35 kg but not less than 32.6
          kg wood corrector weights shall be fitted to bring the hull weight up to not
          less than 35 kg. The corrector weights shall be permanently fitted, half
          to the forward transom and half to the aft transom. No corrector weights
          shall be removed or altered without the boat being re-weighed by an official
          measurer. The weight of each corrector shall be stamped or otherwise
          marked on the corrector and endorsed on the measurement certificate.
          (See also CR 3.2.7.1 for minimum weight of buoyancy air bags.)
3.3       Daggerboard
3.3.1     Materials
3.3.1.1   Boats shall use epoxy daggerboards as specified below. Wood or wood
          epoxy boats may use either wood or epoxy daggerboards. Daggerboards
          presented for first measurement before 28 February 2005 and used on
          boats measured before that date may conform to the rules valid before 1st
          March 2004.




                                           17
          WOOD:




          EPOXY:




          Manufacturers shall, upon request, supply a laminated sample and
          specifications of all materials used.
3.3.1.2   Non-metallic reinforcement (bushing) of diameter not more than 20 mm
          may be used around holes, screws, rivets or bolts.
3.3.1.3   Laminate specification for EPOXY daggerboard:




                                        18
3.3.1.4   For EPOXY foils the manufacturer’s name, a manufacturer generated
          mould identification number as well as the year of manufacture shall be
          laminated into the daggerboard in characters 10 mm +/-2 mm high on
          the starboard side, 25 mm +5/-0 mm below the bottom edge of the stop
          batten. For wooden foils, the manufacturer’s name and the month and year
          of manufacture shall be indelibly marked in the same position and with
          characters of the same size.
3.3.2     Shape
3.3.2.1   The daggerboard shall be generally a rectangular flat plane in shape except
          that the lower corners shall be rounded to a radius of no more than 32 mm,
          and the upper corners shall be rounded to a radius of no more than 5 mm.
          Upper corners and stop batten edges shall have no sharp projections.
3.3.2.2   The thickness of the daggerboard (excluding bevels) shall be not less
          than 14 mm (12 mm for wooden construction) and not more than 15 mm.
          Bevelling is permitted between all edges (except for the top edge) and the
          bevelling limits, situated 60 mm from all edges. There shall be no bevelling
          underneath the stop battens.
3.3.2.3   The overall length of the daggerboard shall be 1067 mm +/- 5 mm and the
          width 285 mm +/- 5mm. Within these limits, the length and width shall each
          not vary by more than 3mm.
3.3.2.4   The daggerboard shall be fitted with stop battens, one on each side of the
          daggerboard. Sizes and shapes of stop battens shall be generally uniform
          without cut-outs and/or sudden changes. The battens shall be made
          from wood and extend over the full width of the board with the top of the
          battens level with the top of the board. The depth shall be 35 mm +/- 5 mm
          throughout. The thickness of the assembled stop battens and daggerboard
          shall be 45 mm +/-5 mm throughout. The exposed edges of the battens
          shall be rounded to a radius of 5 mm +0/-2 mm. The battens shall be
          fixed with glue, and two 5 mm +/-1.5 mm metal bolts and nuts. The length
          of these fasteners shall be the same +0/- 5 mm as the thickness of the
          assembled daggerboard and stop battens.
3.3.3     The weight of the daggerboard, without attachment or positioning features,
          shall be not less than 2.0 kg. Ballasting or cut-outs of the daggerboard are
          prohibited. The centre of gravity of the assembled daggerboard and stop
          battens shall not be less than 520 mm away from the lower edge.
3.3.4     The daggerboard shall float, and shall be attached to the hull. One hole
          shall be drilled through the daggerboard and the battens in any place. Its
          diameter shall not exceed 10 mm. An elastic cord or lanyard shall be used
          to attach the daggerboard to the hull. A small shackle may be used to
          attach the elastic cord or lanyard, either to the hull or the daggerboard.




                                         19
3.3.5     The daggerboard may be held in the daggerboard case by a loop of (elastic)
          cord. The cord may be fixed to the daggerboard case through one or two
          eyes or to the mast thwart bulkhead through two optional holes, with a
          diameter of not more than 10mm. The position of the holes shall be in
          accord with hull sheet plan 16/24. A single extra loop of rope, tape or
          elastic cord may be attached to this loop in order to assist with the process
          of lowering and raising the daggerboard. Both the elastic cord and the
          additional loop may be padded by using flexible hollow tubing.
3.4       Rudder and Tiller
3.4.1     Materials
3.4.1.1   Boats shall use epoxy rudders as specified below. Wood or wood epoxy
          boats may use either wood or epoxy rudders. Rudders presented for first
          measurement before 28 February 2005 and used on boats measured before
          that date may conform to the rules valid before 1st March 2004.
          WOOD:




          EPOXY:




          Manufacturers shall, upon request, supply a laminated sample and
          specifications of all materials used.
3.4.1.2   The tiller and tiller extension of EPOXY rudders shall be made of aluminium.
          The tiller and tiller extension of wooden rudders may be made of wood or
          aluminium. The use of a grip made of plastic and/or rubber on the tiller
          extension is permitted. The joint between the tiller and extension may be
          made of metal (but not titanium), rubber or plastic.
3.4.1.3   Non-metallic reinforcement (bushing) of diameter not more than 20 mm
          may be used around screws, rivets or bolts.




                                         20
3.4.1.4   Laminate specification (for EPOXY rudder)




3.4.1.5   For EPOXY foils the manufacturer’s name, a manufacturer generated mould
          identification number, as well as the year of manufacture shall be laminated
          into the rudder in characters 10 mm +/-2 mm high on the starboard side,
          25 mm +5/-0 mm below the bottom edge of the tiller. For wooden foils, the
          manufacturers name as well as the year of manufacture shall be indelibly
          marked in the same position in the same sizecharacters.
3.4.2     Shape
3.4.2.1   The rudder shape shall be as follows:




3.4.2.2   The thickness of the rudder (excluding bevels) shall be not less than 14 mm
          (12 mm for wooden construction) and not more than 15 mm. Bevelling is
          permitted between the edges and the bevelling limits, situated 60 mm from
          all edges. No bevelling is permitted on the top of the rudder head.



                                         21
3.4.2.3   The tiller shall be removable and shall be fixed to the rudder by two metal
          bolts of 5mm +/-1.5 mm diameter. The fitting connecting tiller and tiller
          extension is optional. Tiller, tiller extension and fittings shall have no sharp
          projections.
3.4.2.4   The tiller and tiller extension shall each be not more than 750 mm long and
          their combined length shall not be more than 1200 mm.
3.4.3     The assembled rudder, tiller and tiller extension shall float, and their total
          weight shall not be less than 1.5 kg. Ballasting of any part of this assembly
          is prohibited.
3.4.4     Definition of Rudder elements
3.4.4.1   Bearing lines: two horizontal lines (parallel to the baseline) through the
          bearing points of the rudder fittings.
3.4.4.2   Rudder head front line: line passing through the intersections of the forward
          edge of the rudder and the two bearing lines.
3.4.5     Fixing and positioning:
          Boats built before 1 March 1992 may either use the rudder positioning
          method which was applicable at the time of building, or the current one.
          The positioning fittings of the rudder themselves shall then comply with the
          correspondingly dated rules for the rudder.
3.4.5.1   Two pintles shall be fixed on the rudder, their diameter shall be not more
          than nominal 6mm. The distance between the upper edge of the tiller and
          the bearing line of the upper pintle shall be not less than 85 mm, measured
          along the rudder head frontline. Two gudgeons shall be fixed to the aft
          transom, with holes not less than 6 mm diameter. The distance between
          the bearing lines of the two gudgeons shall be not less than 200 mm. The
          corresponding distance between the pintles shall be not more than 200
          mm. The depth of the pivoting holes in the two gudgeons shall not exceed
          5 mm, and the distances from those holes to the aft face of the aft transom
          shall not differ by more than 2 mm.
3.4.5.2   The rudder and tiller assembly shall be fitted to the aft transom so that it
          does not become detached from the hull during a capsize. To this effect, an
          appropriate retaining clip/spring shall be fitted on the forward edge of the
          rudder head, not less than 5 mm below the bearing line of the upper pintle.
3.4.5.3   When fitted to the aft transom, the distances from the rudder head frontline
          to the aft face of the aft transom, measured at the position of both bearing
          lines, shall be not more than 45mm and shall not differ by more than 2 mm.
3.5       Spars
3.5.1     Materials
3.5.1.1   The spars shall be made of either, aluminium alloy tube or, of solid
          wood. Wooden spars shall be of not more than two pieces of wood. Any
          exploitation of tolerances in order to achieve non-circular, tapered or


                                           22
          otherwise variable spars, is prohibited.The wall thickness of the aluminium
          alloy tubing shall be constant throughout the spars. Internal sleeves, ribs
          and stiffening are prohibited.
3.5.1.2   Plastic, wood or metal may be used for end caps and fittings including
          the boom jaws. End caps, sprit end and jaws fittings shall be permanently
          fixed but may be glued to the spars. The length of the fittings and cap shall
          not exceed 100 mm for the lower end of the mast, the outboard end of the
          boom and the jaws fitting, 60 mm for the top of the mast and both ends of
          the sprit. At the top of the mast the height of the visible part of an optional
          end cap shall not exceed 10 mm.
3.5.1.3   Spars shall be capable of floating approximately horizontally for thirty
          minutes with no discernible water penetration for a sealed spar or loss of
          buoyancy for a foam filled spar.
3.5.1.4   Unless specifically permitted by these rules, fittings on spars shall be
          permanently fixed by means of rivets, screws, and/or nuts and bolts.
3.5.1.5   Non-metallic protective material may be used on the sprit at the area where
          sprit and mast make contact. Thismaterial shall not exceed max. 150mm
          length and max. 1.5mm thickness.
3.5.2     Mast
3.5.2.1   The mast shall be approximately circular in section. The diameter shall be
          45mm ± 0.5mm.
3.5.2.2   Masts shall be of uniform section above 50 mm from the heel. Wooden
          masts may be reinforced with a GRP or plastic collar which shall extend not
          more than 800 mm above the heel and shall not increase the diameter by
          more than 4 mm.
3.5.2.3   An aluminium mast may be fitted with not more than two sleeves of GRP or
          plastic to allow it to fit a larger diameter mast thwart hole and mast step.
          Each sleeve shall be of uniform wall thickness and shall not extend along
          the mast for more than 50 mm.
3.5.2.4   The overall length of the mast shall be not more than 2350 mm.
3.5.2.5   Standing rigging of any sort is prohibited.
3.5.2.6   The mast shall have either two holes, in any direction in the horizontal
          plane, or two eyes, which need not be permanently fixed, or one eye and one
          hole. The upper edge of one of the holes or eyes shall be not less than 20
          mm from the top of the mast and the upper edge of the other not less than
          120 mm from the top of the mast. Lacing lines shall pass through these
          eyes or holes and shall be lashed through the eyelet at the throat of the sail,
          see also CR. 6.6.3.1 A wind indicator or wind indicator fittings (CR. 3.5.2.12)
          may secure, or be secured by these lacing lines, but this does not release
          the lines from the obligation of passing through the holes or eyes.




                                           23
3.5.2.7    Distinctively coloured bands, clearly visible while racing, and each not less
           than 10 mm wide shall be marked on the mast as follows:
           (a) Band No. 1, the lower edge of which shall be not less than 610 mm
               from the top of the mast.
           (b) Band No. 2, the upper edge of which shall be not more than 635 mm
               from the top of the mast.
           The lower edge of Band No. 1 and the upper edge of Band No. 2 shall be
           permanently marked by a scribed line or not less than two marks made with
           a centre punch.
3.5.2.8    The mast shall be positioned in the mast step by means of wedges, blocks
           or other devices so that it shall be unable to move more than 3 mm in any
           horizontal direction. The position of the heel of the mast shall not be varied
           while racing.
3.5.2.9    The mast shall have a cleat in a suitable position for securing the boom
           downhaul.
3.5.2.10   The mast shall have, in a suitable position, for the sprit, either a cleat and
           one hole or eye (which need not be permanently fixed), or a toothed rack.
3.5.2.11   A locking device or other arrangement shall be fitted and used to prevent
           the mast from coming out of its step when the boat is capsized.
3.5.2.12   A wind indicator may be fitted to the top of the mast. The mast may have
           a fitting (which need not be permanently fixed) for securing the wind
           indicator. Such a fitting shall be positioned within 150 mm below the top
           end of the mast and it shall have no sharp projections. The wind indicator or
           its attachment fittings may be used to help secure the lacing lines from the
           throat of the sail.
3.5.2.13   The mast may have a pin stop positioned on the forward side of the mast
           1680 mm +/- 10 mm below the top end of the mast. This pin shall not be
           more than 8 mm diameter and within 10 mm of the surface of the mast and
           shall have no sharp projections.
3.5.3      Boom
3.5.3.1    The boom shall be approximately circular and of uniform section
           throughout. The diameter shall be not less than 29.5mm and not more than
           55.5mm and at any section it shall not vary by more than 1mm.
3.5.3.2    The boom, excluding the boom jaws, shall not exceed 2057 mm in length.
3.5.3.3    The type of boom jaws and jaws fitting is optional but thickness of the jaws
           shall not exceed 35 mm and the length of the jaws fittings shall not exceed
           100 mm. A rope may be fastened to the boom jaws or jaws fittings through
           two holes or through two eyes, and pass forward, around and over a pin
           positioned on the forward surface of the mast (See also CR 3.5.2.13).




                                            24
3.5.3.4   A distinctively coloured band, clearly visible while racing, and not less than
          10 mm wide shall be marked on the boom with its forward edge not more
          than 2000 mm from the aft edge of the mast. The inner edge of the band
          shall be permanently marked by a scribed line or not less than two marks
          made with a centre punch. The coloured band at the outboard end of the
          boom may be on a permanently fixed end cap, provided that no visible part
          of the end cap extends inward of the position of the forward edge of the
          band, and that the cap complies with the former part of this rule, and with
          class rule 3.5.3.2.
3.5.3.5   Either the boom or the end cap shall have a hole or lacing eye. The forward
          edge of the hole or the opening of the eye shall be not more than 40 mm
          from the inner edge of the band at the outboard end of the boom.
3.5.3.6   A cleat with no sharp projections for securing a clew outhaul may be fitted
          on the boom. It shall be not less than 400 mm from the outer end of the
          boom.
3.5.3.7   The boom downhaul may be attached to the boom in an optional manner
          by use of a fixed stop or lacing eye at a fixed position Attached to the upper
          side of the boom, the bearing edge of the fitting used shall not be more than
          200mm from the inner end of the boom excluding boom jaws. Attached
          elsewhere, the outer edge of the fitting used shall not be more than 200mm
          from the inner end of the boom excluding boom jaws.
3.5.3.8   The method of attachment of the mainsheet or mainsheet block(s) to
          the boom is optional (provided they cannot slip along the boom, and the
          maximum clearance between the span and the boom shall be not more
          than 100 mm, at any position along the boom). The position of the blocks
          or the length of boom strops shall not be adjusted while racing. Provided
          they cannot slip along the span, the use of multiple rings on the span is
          permitted. Each block shall not have more than 2 sheaves.
3.5.3.9   There shall not be any fitting, rigging or device the purpose of which is, or
          may be, to control the position of the boom on the mast except for items
          specifically required or permitted by these rules.
3.5.4     Sprit
3.5.4.1   The sprit shall be approximately circular and of uniform section throughout.
          Its diameter shall be 27.5mm ± 2mm.
3.5.4.2   The sprit shall be not more than 2286 mm in length, including end fittings.
3.5.4.3   The type of fitting at the upper end of the sprit shall be as shown in the
          rigging plan. If the upper end fitting exhibits a widening after an initial
          narrowing, this widening shall not be in excess of 13 mm. The fitting at
          the lower end of the sprit shall be either one of the fittings permitted at its
          upper end, or the sprit may be fitted with an eye, a hook, or it may have a
          hole through the spar. The length of the end fittings on both ends shall not
          exceed 60 mm. The eye, hook or hole at the lower end of the sprit if present,
          shall be located within 60 mm of this end.

                                          25
3.5.5     Running Rigging
3.5.5.1   The mainsheet arrangement is optional except as controlled by CR 3.2.6.1
          and CR 3.5.3.8.
3.5.5.2   Downhaul. A single part downhaul of rope and/or wire shall be fitted to the
          boom not more than 200 mm from the inner edge of the boom jaws. It shall
          be secured to a cleat on the mast. The downhaul shall not be adjustable
          from aft of the midship frame.
3.5.5.3   Only the lower end of the sprit shall be made fast to the mast. The only
          methods of attachment and adjustment of the lower end of the sprit shall
          be by means of:
          (a) A rope or wire rope loop in conjunction with a toothed rack.The
              maximum dimensions of the toothed rack are:
               Length 		           150 mm
               Width 		            20 mm
               Thickness           3 mm
               Height of tooth     10 mm
          OR
          (b) A halyard consisting of not more than two parts of rope or rope/wire
              combination, with no more than two single sheave blocks, to obtain no
              more than a double “Purchase” plus one hole or one eye, and one cleat
              which are fastened on the mast. The way of attaching the blocks on
              the lower end of the sprit or on the mast is optional. The sprit shall not
              be adjustable from aft of the mid-ship frame.
3.5.5.4   Outhaul. The outhaul shall be made of a rope not more than 1200 mm long.
          It may be adjustable. In this case it shall use no more than two purchases;
          no blocks are allowed; and the outhaul end shall then pass through the hole
          or lacing eye near the end of the boom (see also CR 3.5.3.5) and be secured
          to the outhaul cleat on the boom.
3.5.5.5   The use of wire is prohibited except for the boom downhaul, sprit halyard
          and strops on the boom for fitting sheet blocks.
3.5.5.6   No running rigging shall be allowed inside of hollow spars.
4.        ADDITIONAL RULES
4.1       Only one person shall be on board while racing.
4.2
          (a) The helmsman shall wear a personal flotation device to the minimum
              standard ISO 12402-5 (Level 50) or equivalent. All fastening devices
              supplied by the manufacturer shall be used in the manner intended.
              A whistle shall be carried securely attached to the personal flotation
              device.


                                          26
        (b) With reference to the Racing Rules of Sailing the total weight of
            clothing and equipment worn or carried by a competitor, excluding
            footwear shall not be capable of exceeding 8 kg when weighed as
            provided in Appendix H of the Racing Rules.
        (c) Hiking pants are permitted provided they are not attached to the boat
            and do not contain any stiffening which can extend below the knee
            joint.
4.3     The following equipment shall be on board while racing:
        (a) One or more bailers which shall each be individually and securely
            attached to the hull by a lanyard(s) or elastic cord(s). One bailer shall
            have a minimum capacity of one litre.
        (b) A painter of a single piece of buoyant rope, not less than 5 mm
            diameter and not less than 8 m long securely fastened to the mast
            thwart or mast step. (see also 3.2.6.1).
        (c) “A paddle of wood and/or plastic, weighing not less than 200g, having
            corner radii of minimum 5 mm and a blade able to contain a rectangle
            of 200 mm x 130 mm shall be securely attached to the hull by a lanyard
            or elastic cord.”
4.4     An anchor need be carried only when specifically prescribed in the sailing
        instructions.
4.5     Unless damage renders a hull, sail, spar or foil unusable during an event,
        only one hull, sail, mast, boom, sprit, daggerboard and rudder shall be used
        throughout the event. Any such change of equipment shall be authorised by
        the Race Committee.
4.6     If there is a national Optimist Class Association of the country in which
        the boat is registered the owner shall be a member. Where a boat is sailing
        in an international regatta the competitor shall be a member of a national
        Optimist association or other body which is itself a member of the IODA as
        defined in IODA Article 3(a).
5.      SPARE RULE NUMBER

6.      SAIL
6.1     General
6.1.1   Sails shall comply with the Class Rules in force at the time of certification
        unless otherwise specified below.
6.1.2   Anything not specifically permitted by these rules is prohibited, see also CR.
        1.2.




                                        27
6.1.3     Sails shall be made and measured in accordance with the current World
          Sailing “Equipment Rules of Sailing” as applicable to Optimist sails, except
          where varied herein. Where a term defined or measurement given in these
          World Sailing Rules is used in these rules, it is printed in “italic” type. All
          measurements shall be taken along the surface of the sail and include any
          bolt rope and tabling. Battens shall not be removed for sail measurement
          purposes.
6.1.4     Certification
          A measurer approved by an MNA or a ClassAssociation where so
          authorised by an MNA shall certify the sail in the tack and shall sign and
          date the certification mark.
6.2       Sailmaker
6.2.1     No licence is required.
6.2.2     The thickness of the body of the sail shall be not less than 0.15 mm. Where
          in the construction of the body of the sail the cloth is of variable thickness,
          the thinnest parts of the sail as measured by a micrometer with a spindle
          surface of 6.4 mm +/- 0.25 mm diameter shall each be at least 9 mm x 9
          mm square, and the thickness of the cloth shall be deemed to be that of the
          thinnest parts. Sails which are not so constructed shall cease to comply
          with Class Rules from 1 March 2005.
          The thickness in mm of the body of the sail shall be indelibly marked by the
          manufacturer, together with his signature, stamp, and date near the peak
          point.
6.2.3     For the purpose of repairing a sail, ply different to the ply of the body of the
          sail may be used up to a limit of one panel or one secondary reinforcement.
6.3       Mainsail
6.3.1     Identification
6.3.1.1   The class insignia shall conform with the dimensions and requirements
          as detailed in the diagram in CR 2.7.1 and be placed in accordance with
          the diagram contained in Sail Plan Sheet 4/5. No part of the class insignia
          shall extend beyond 1000 mm of the peak point. The class insignia shall be
          placed back to back on both sides of the sail.
6.3.2     Materials
          The ply fibres shall be of polyester or cotton.
6.3.3     Construction
6.3.3.1   The construction shall be: soft sail, single ply sail.
6.3.3.2   The body of the sail shall consist of the same woven ply throughout.
6.3.3.3   The sail shall have two batten pockets in the leech. Local widening for
          batten insertion (if any) shall be on the upper edge of the batten pockets.
          The outer end of the batten pockets shall be parallel to the leech at that
          point.
                                            28
6.3.3.4    The leech shall not deviate more than +5/-10 mm from a straight line
           between:
           (a) the peak point and the intersection of the leech and the upper edge of
               the top batten pocket.
           (b) The intersection of the leech and the lower edge of the top batten
               pocket on the intersection of the leech and the upper edge of the lower
               batten pocket.
           (c) The clew point and intersection of the leech and the lower edge of the
               lower batten pocket.
           Sails which do not comply with CR 6.3.3.4 shall not be used after 1 March
           2005.
6.3.3.5    The leech shall not deviate more than +20/-5 mm from a straight line
           between the intersection of the leech and the lower edge of the top batten
           pocket and the clew point. Sails presented for first measurement after 1
           March 2005 shall comply with this rule.
6.3.3.6    The following are permitted: stitching, glues, bolt ropes, tabling, 2 batten
           pockets, batten pocket elastic, batten pocket patches, flutter patches, one
           trapezoidal window, sail maker label, sail button(s), tell tales. Further to CR
           1.2 and 6.1.2, the following are prohibited: carbon fibres, titanium.
6.3.3.7    Primary reinforcements shall be made of woven ply of any thickness. The
           ply fibres shall be made of polyester or cotton.
6.3.3.8    Secondary reinforcements shall be made from the same woven ply as the
           body of the sail, with the exception that batten pocket patches and flutter
           patchesmay bemade from a woven cotton or polyester ply, thinner than that
           of the body of the sail. Edges of secondary reinforcements shall be fixed
           by a maximum of two lines of stitches or bonding agents. Parallel or nearly
           parallel lines of stitching or bonding agent used elsewhere in the secondary
           reinforcement shall bemore than 40mm apart. If two rows of closely
           positioned stitching are used to fix the edge of the secondary reinforcement
           then any inner lines of parallel stitching shall be more than 40 mm distant
           from the inner line of edge stitching.
6.3.3.9    Tabling shall be either by folds of the body of the sail, or of separate
           polyester or cotton material not thinner than the body of the sail.
6.3.3.10   Each batten pocket patch shall consist of two circular layers of white
           ply. Ply different to the ply of the body of the sail may be used. Sails first
           presented for certification after 1 May 2015 shall comply with this rule.
           Sails presented for certification after 1 April 2020 shall comply with circular
           layers.
6.3.3.11   Wire or elastic cord shall not be used in the sail. Any bolt rope or tabling
           used to strengthen the luff or head of the sail shall be fastened to the sail
           throughout its entire length. If a bolt rope is enclosed in the tabling, it shall
           be sewn to the sail by visible stitches at those corners of the sail to which
           the rope extends. No bolt rope is permitted in the leech or foot.
                                             29
6.3.3.12   There shall be 8 eyelets in the foot of the sail, including those at the tack
           and clew. There shall be 8 eyelets in the luff of the sail, including those at
           the throat and tack. (See also CR 6.4 for spacing between eyelets in luff and
           foot.)
6.4        Dimensions




                                           30
6.5       Class Insignia, National Letters and Sail Numbers, Luff Measurement Band
6.5.1     Numbers and letters on sails shall be of the following dimension (see also
          Sail Plan sheet 4/5)




          The national letters shall be placed on the same line on opposite sides of
          the sail with letters on the starboard side of the sail closer to the luff than
          those on the port side of the sail (see also Sail Plan sheet 4/5).The numbers
          shall be placed in two rows below the letters with the starboard side
          numbers uppermost. The following spacing shall apply:




6.5.2     The sail shall have a sail measurement band on its luff (luff measurement
          band). This band, of a colour that strongly contrasts with the sail, shall
          be permanently fixed or marked on both sides of the sail. It shall be
          perpendicular to the edge of the luff of the sail, and shall start at its edge.
          See CR 3.5.2.7 and Sail Plan for position and dimension of bands.
6.6       Additional Rules
6.6.1     Only sails endorsed in accordance with CR 2.5.6 shall be used.
6.6.2     The manufacturer of sail battens is optional. The construction material is
          optional except that carbon fibre is prohibited.
6.6.3     Fastening and positioning.
6.6.3.1   The upper edge of the luff measurement band shall not extend above the
          lower edge of Band No. 1, and the lower edge of the luff measurement band
          shall not extend below the upper edge of Band No. 2. At the throat, both
          mast holes or lacing eyes referred to in CR 3.5.2.6 shall be used to prevent
          any part of the luff measurement band rising above the lower edge of Band
          No. 1.
6.6.3.2   No part of the clew point shall extend beyond the inner edge of the boom
          band.


                                           31
6.6.3.3   The luff of the sail shall be lashed to the mast at each eyelet so as to be
          within 10 mm of the mast.
6.6.3.4   The foot of the sail shall be lashed to the boom at each eyelet so as to be
          within 10 mm of the boom. Alternatively, at the tack eyelet, it may either be
          lashed to the jaw fittings or attached through two holes in the jaws or jaw
          fittings, so as to be within 10 mm of the boom or its imaginary extension
          (see also Rigging Plan sheet 12/12).
6.6.3.5   The sail shall be fastened to the mast and boom with cordage only.
6.6.3.6   The peak of the sail shall be fastened to the upper end of the sprit either by
          means of an eyelet at the peak, or by means of a loop made of tape or rope
          sewn to the peak.




                                          32
Appendix A
Class Rules Specific To Wood and Wood/Epoxy Hulls

2.5.1     Only a measurer officially recognised by a National Authority shall
          measure a hull, spars, sails and equipment, and sign the declaration
          on the measurement form that they comply with the Class Rules. Hulls
          shall be measured in accordance with the appropriate hull measurement
          instructions. After the measurer has signed the measurement form, he shall
          affix the World Sailing plaque to the mast thwart bulkhead as per CR2.7.2
2.5.4     All hulls shall comply with the current rules or the rules current at the time
          the boat was first measured. Hulls first measured between 1 March 1997
          and 1 March 1998 shall conform either to the class rules in force from
          1 March 1995 or the class rules in force from 1 March 1997. Hulls first
          measured after 1 March 1998 shall conform to the class rules then current.
          Fittings, spars, sails and other equipment shall comply with the current
          rules unless otherwise stated in the specific class rule referring to such
          equipment.
3.2.1     Materials - WOOD AND WOOD/EPOXY
3.2.1.1   The hull shall be constructed of materials approved by World Sailing. The
          following are the currently approved materials: wood.
3.2.1.2   Hulls shall be constructed from:




          The builder shall on request supply a sample and specification sheet of any
          plywood used.
3.2.2.1   The dimensions of the hull shall be as shown on the plans and as given in
          these rules, diagrams and measurement form and shall conform with the
          tolerances stated therein.
3.2.2.5   The overall length excluding rudder fittings, shall be 2300 mm +/- 12 mm,
          measured at the sheerline.
3.2.2.9   The forward and aft transom shall be flat with not more than 5 mm
          tolerance.




                                          33
3.2.2.10   The inside of the daggerboard case and of the slot in the hog and bottom
           panel shall be 330 mm +/- 5 mm. The ends in the daggerboard case slot
           shall be parallel and square to the base line. A rake to taper not exceeding
           5mm is permitted. The upper edge of the daggerboard case shall be parallel
           to the base line, with a tolerance of 5 mm maximum.
3.2.2.11   The inside width of the daggerboard case and the slot in the hog and
           bottom panel shall be 17 mm +/- 1 mm. The fore and aft ends of the slot
           shall be semi-circular in cross section. (See also CR 3.2.6.1)
3.2.2.12   The outside edges of the hull between bottom and side panels, between
           the bottom and forward transom, and between the side panels and forward
           transom shall be rounded to a radius of 4 mm +/-2 mm. At the aft transom
           side and bottom outside edges no radius is permitted.
3.2.3      Wood and wood/epoxy Hull Construction Details
3.2.3.1    There shall be a mast thwart positioned as shown on the plan. It shall be
           195 mm +/- 5 mm wide and not less than 16 mm nor more than 25 mm
           thick.
3.2.3.2    There shall be a mast thwart bulkhead fixed to the aft side of the mast
           thwart, and in wooden hulls to the side pieces secured to the side panels, as
           shown on the plans.
3.2.3.3    There shall be a midship frame positioned as shown on the plans with
           limber holes in the positions shown.
3.2.3.4    The shape of the hole in the mast step is optional. (See also CR 3.2.6.1(f)).
3.2.4      Construction Details - Wood
3.2.4.1    Hulls of Traditional Wood Construction
           (a) The hog, bilge stringers and chine shall be of wood bonded to the
               inside of the bottom panel. they shall each be of uniform thickness and
               shall each be of uniform width:
                (i)   for the hog 16 x 100 mm min
                (ii) for the bilge stringers chine and gunwale 16 x 35 mm min.
           (b) The scantlings for the frames, hog, stringers and chine shall be
               complied with but exposed corners, except for the gunwale (see rule (i)
               below), may be rounded to a maximum radius of 5 mm.
           (c) not used in this version
           (d) not used in this version
           (e) The midship bottom frame and the daggerboard case sides shall be of
               plywood with a nominal thickness of 12 mm.
           (f) As optional construction. the bow and aft transoms shall be of
               plywood with a nominal thickness of min. 6 mm and max. 12 mm.
           (g) The bottom and side panels, knees and mast thwart bulkhead shall be
               of plywood with a nominal thickness not less than 6 mm.
                                           34
          (h) The bottom and side panels shall each be of the same nominal
              thickness throughout.
          (i)   The exposed edges of the gunwale stringer and the rubbing strake
                shall be rounded to a radius of not less than 5 mm.
          (j)   The knees at the transom may be inset so that their upper surfaces are
                level with the top of the gunwale stringers.
          (k) Exposed edges of plywood may be capped with solid wood or plywood.
              The depth of the capping shall not exceed the thickness of the plywood
              being covered and its width shall not exceed the width of the part of
              assembled parts being capped.
3.2.4.2   Hulls of Wood/Epoxy Construction
          (a) The hog and bilge stringers shall be of plywood bonded to the inside of
              the bottom panel. They shall each be of uniform thickness and shall
              each be of uniform width:
                (i)   for the hog not less than 180 mm wide;
                (ii) for the stringers not less than 70 mm wide, except forward of the
                     mast thwart bulkhead where they may be tapered to conform to
                     the shape of the bottom panels.
                (iii) the thickness of the bottom panel and hog or stringers together
                      shall be not less than 15 mm
          (b) Alternatively the bottom may be constructed of one or more sheets of
              plywood with a total uniform thickness of not less than 15 mm. When
              such a construction is used, hog and stringers are not required.
          (c) The scantlings shown on the plans for the frames, hog and
              stringers shall be complied with but exposed corners, except for the
              gunwale(see rule (f) below), which may be rounded to a maximum
              radius of 5 mm.
          (d) The bottom panel shall either be stitched to the side panels and
              transoms with copper wire at spacing of not more than 60 mm, and/or
              glued with epoxy glue. The joints may be taped inside and/or outside
              with glass tape and resin.
          (e) Joints between midship frame and bottom panel, midship frame and
              the sides shall be taped with glass tape and resin or glued with epoxy
              glue fillets.
          (f) The midship bottom frame and the daggerboard case sides shall be of
              plywood with a nominal thickness of 12 mm.
          (g) As optional construction. the bow and aft transoms shall be of
              plywood with a nominal thickness of min. 6 mm and max. 12 mm.
          (h) The bottom and side panels, knees and mast thwart bulkhead shall be
              of plywood with a nominal thickness not less than 6 mm.


                                           35
            (i)   The bottom and side panels shall each be of the same nominal
                  thickness throughout.
            (j)   The exposed edges of the gunwale stringer and the rubbing strake shall
                  be rounded to a radius of not less than 5 mm.
            (k) The knees at the transom may be inset so that their upper surfaces are
                level with the top of the gunwale stringers.
            (l)   Exposed edges of plywood may be capped with solid wood or plywood.
                  The depth of the capping shall not exceed the thickness of the plywood
                  being covered and its width shall not exceed the width of the part of
                  assembled parts being capped.




Plans

The following are the current official plans: (Wood and GRP)


New 95 GRP plans                                                             March 1995
                                                                   Amended March 1996


Traditional Wooden Plans                                                     March 1997
Wood/Epoxy Plans                                                             March 1997


Rigging Plan                                                March 1991 Amended 1994


Foil Plan                                                                       Obsolete


Sail Plan                                                                    March 1994


                                                                Effective: 1 January 2020
                                                               Last Issue: 1 January 2019




                                           36
Addendum

Below are detailed references to the World Sailing Regulations that are mentioned in
our class rules. These extracts are accurate as of 1st January 2016, please confirm
that they have not been amended by checking on the World Sailing website.
http://www.sailing.org/tools/documents/2020RegulationsClean-[25927].pdf


World Sailing Advertising Code

20.2.4     Any Advertising and anything advertised shall meet generally accepted
           moral and ethical standards. Any Advertising which is political, religious,
           racial or propaganda shall not be displayed on a boat, personal equipment
           or any other object on board a boat while Racing. Attention is also drawn
           to the laws of individual nations which may restrict Advertising within their
           territory or territorial waters. (See Class Rule 2.8)
                                       20.3        Competitor’s Advertising
                                       20.3.2      Subject to any limitations on
                                                   Advertising in the applicable class
                                                   rules or the rules of the relevant
                                                   System, Advertising chosen by the
                                                   Person in Charge may be displayed
                                                   on a boat or part thereof, except
                                                   on the areas detailed in Regulation
                                                   20.4 and Table 1. See the World
                                                   Sailing website for details of
                                                   Table 1. The picture left shows the
                                                   space that can be used for both
                                                   Event Advertising and competitor
                                                   advertising. Sailors may also
                                                   display advertising on their clothing
                                                   provided that it complies with
                                                   class rule 2.8 and World Sailing
                                                   20.2.4 above. Please note that at
                                                   some events (IODA team racing
           events for example) sailors may be required to wear bibs or other means
           of identification which may cover personal advertising. This requirement
           should be stipulated in the Notice of Race for the event.




                                           37
20.6     Sponsor’s Advertising of World Sailing Classes and Recognized Systems
20.6.1   A World Sailing Class and a Recognized System may enter into a contract
         with a sponsor which will require the boats of that World Sailing Class
         or certified under that Recognized System to display such sponsor’s
         Advertising provided that:
         (a) the relevant Class Association or the governing body of the Recognized
             System, in accordance with its rules, has previously approved the
             principle of a sponsorship contract; and
         (b) the displaying of such sponsor’s Advertising is restricted to areas
             reserved to the Organizing Authority as detailed in Regulation 20.4 and
             Table 1; and
         (c) the boats are only required to display such sponsor’s Advertising at
             events at which that World Sailing Class or that Recognized System is
             the Organizing Authority, or at events for which that World Sailing Class
             or that Recognized System have executed a written agreement with
             the Organizing Authority permitting the boats to display such sponsor’s
             Advertising.
         The International Class fulfilled the requirements of 20.6.1 in 2011 and
         have first claim to the bow area of all Optimists at their International Class
         Championships
20.6.2   The National Class Association of a World Sailing Class or the national
         governing body of a Recognized System shall not, without the prior
         written consent of respectively the World Sailing Class Association or the
         international governing body, enter into a sponsorship contract requiring the
         boats to display Advertising.




                                         38
39
